
# Features of go

- static type
    - yet feel dynamic

- garabage collector
    - sub milisecond pause

- rich and standard liberary
- fast compilation
- force you to check error before compilation

- great tooling
    - the go tool --> build , run, test, banchmark , install
    - modules --> dependency management
    - build in profiler and tracer --> with web interface
    - build in logging and metrics
    - a lots of 3rd party modules

- will save money
    - iron.io went down from 30 servers to 2 servers
    - compiles to static executable --> no JVM like stuff needed
        - easy deployment
    - stable api
    - easy to cross compile between different distrubution
        - if you build python program in windows machine then it will not run in macOS or Linux machine
        - but go can cross compile.



- while fetching external packages go used git under the hood for fetching. It does not have fetching mechanism inbuild. It uses others.



# lets get to coding part

- Create a directory 
- inside ditectory run  `go mod init directoryName`
- for  every new project you must reate a new folder.

- all go files inside same folder must have same package 

- -->  lets go to golang1 inside codefile

- note: package name and the function name where program start must be same.

# strings and formated outputs

- module used is `fmt`
- strings in go is unicode 
- if name is started with capital letter then it will be exportable else not
- string in go start with double quote(`"`)

- inside golan1 create go  file using golang1.go

- now lets build this go file in machine executable code `go build relativePathOfGoFile`
    - eg `go build .` --> . means all the file inside current directory

-  to run your go file during development
    - `go run relativePathOfGoFile`

- to see the time taken by your go executable to run . 
    - `time go run executablePath`

- lets see how big is our code 
    - type ls -lh

```
$ ls -lh
total 1.7M
-rwxrwxr-x 1 anujaj anujaj 1.7M Jan 28 20:13 golang1*
-rw-rw-r-- 1 anujaj anujaj  136 Jan 28 20:13 golang1.go
➜  golang1 git:(main) ✗ 

```

**this file is very big**
- because this executable contail not only code , but also goruntime, etc. all things that needed fo r the code to run in any machine without go installed in it.

- lets see info about the executable file created
    - `file executablePath`

```
✗ file golang1*
golang1:    ELF 64-bit LSB executable, x86-64, version 1 (SYSV), statically linked, Go BuildID=1Zo_rARd7C5Sr9MviBVy/sPduJPyl_6rvnTKYoBlh/Alag2fwL1zgEXpXi1I2_/ZUe7vWkPLti-TkKhFjcC, not stripped
golang1.go: C source, ASCII text
```

- see its a statically linked --> meaning it does not depend on any shared liberary . 


- what cross compile means , is you can create executable for any machine while building in your current machine

    - lets say you are currently in linuxOS and want ot buil executable for macOS
        - type `GOOS=darwin go build` --> give you mac executable
        - darwin is mac architecture

    - you cans see many thing in go environmental variable
        - type `go env`
        - above `GOOS` is also environmental varabale 



- To decleare and intilize at the same time we use `:=` in go 

## Loops in go


 Go has only one looping construct, the for loop.

The basic for loop has three components separated by semicolons:

    the init statement: executed before the first iteration
    the condition expression: evaluated before every iteration
    the post statement: executed at the end of every iteration

The init statement will often be a short variable declaration, and the variables declared there are visible only in the scope of the for statement.

The loop will stop iterating once the boolean condition evaluates to false.

Note: Unlike other languages like C, Java, or JavaScript there are no parentheses surrounding the three components of the for statement and the braces { } are always required.
    




### Multi line commints --> /*  coment */
























































