# concepts

- container is made to run a specific program or processes unlike the VMs which are created to host an OS. Meaning if we run `docker run ubuntu` usually we will see a container is running to run ubuntu OS. but its not the case , when you run `docker ps` you will se nothing, because here ubuntu is not running any processes inside of it, when there is no processes running in the container inside container the container will automatically stops. So the point is to keep running the container, it needed atleast one processes running.
- We cannot remove an image if a container is runnning based on it.

### Attach and detach mode
  - there are two type of mode an docker contianer can be executed. attach and detach mode. In attach mode the stdIN, stdOut, and StdError, will be attached to current terminal session, meaning you cannot do anything else other then interacting with container with that terminal . also if you close the terminal session then the running container will also closes. the code for attahced mode is `docker run -it imageName`
  - the other way is detached mode, in this mode the docker contiainer will be stared in background, and will be independent ti that terminal session, meaning you can do anything with terminal other then interacting with  that contianer. the code to run it in detqach mode is , `docker run -d imagesName` . if you want to interact with that container you have to connect your terminal session with that container, the code for that is `docker attach containerID`

## About docker run

- TO run an container of certain imageg of older version , we use tag. the code is `docker run imageName:tag` --> here imageName is the name of image anf tag is the version number which is seperated with colon
-  when we type `docker run imageName`, the continer will run but it will be unabe to take input from the user, it can only give standard output (stdOut). to let the contianer take input we use `docker run -i imageName` here `-i` stands for interactive mode. withe this the contiane is able to take input from the user , but it won't be map the terminal of the contianer to that of current terminal session . SO to do that we use `docker run -i -t imgageName ` or `docker run -it imageName`, here -t stands for terminal

### port mapping

- lets say you are running a webserver in odcker container , you can open it in browser in 2 ways , using `ip address of the continer` or by the `port mapping`. 

- lets see the first method , this method can only be used by the host machine on whihc contiahne ris running. to use the coninter ip address we first have to find out the ip address of the continer . we can do this by `docker inspect <container_name_or_id> | grep "IPAddress"` , this will give us the ip address of the continaer , we just have to open this ip address on browser with providig the port on which our server is running inside tghe container.
- second method is by binding the port of host ip ( local host ) with that of contianer ip . in this approch after binding the both ips , we just have to go to host ip address with added post binding(`localhost:PORT`) . the dofe to bind the port is `docker run -p hostPORT:containerPORT imageName`. here when we go to url `http://localhost:hostPORT` we will get connect with the container application running on `contianerPORT` inside container.

### volume mapping

- lets imagine you are created a database container example `mysql`. and you have stored lots of your important data inside of this contianer. but when you delete this contianer all your data will be deleted with this contianer. so to persist this data on outside this contianer we use the concept of `volume mapping`. the code for this is `docker run -v hostPathToDataStorage:containerPathToDataStorage imageName` . here all the data which si suppose to stored in contianer volume having path `containerPathToDataStorage` will be stored in `hostPathToDataStorage`. and will be persisted even if the docker contianer will be deleted.


### TO check the detailed imformation about specific contianer ( inspect the contianer)
- when you needed to check the detailed inforamation about perticulat container like , name network information, volume mouthing etc. use the code ` docker inspect contianerName`

### To check the logs of a continer

- to check the logs or content writted in stdOut of a continer which is runnng in detached mode . use the command `docker logs containerID`
