

# LINK LAYER    --> Transmission of data over wired / wireless connection

- The Link layer, also known as the Data Link layer, is the second layer of the TCP/IP stack and corresponds to OSI layer 2. The main responsibility of the Link layer is to provide a reliable link between devices on a local network, such as a LAN (Local Area Network). This is achieved by providing error detection and correction capabilities, as well as flow control and multiplexing of data.

- The Link layer is divided into two sublayers: the Media Access Control (MAC) sublayer and the Logical Link Control (LLC) sublayer. **The MAC sublayer is responsible for providing access to the physical medium, such as a wired or wireless network**. It handles the addressing and delivery of data packets to the correct destination device on the local network. **The LLC sublayer is responsible for managing flow control and multiplexing protocols over the MAC layer**. This includes the ability to transmit and demultiplex data, ensuring that data is properly received and processed by the intended device.

- Together, they perform OSI layers 1 and 2, Data Link and Physical. The Link layer is responsible for connectivity to the local network. The first sublayer, MAC, is responsible for access to the physical medium. The LLC layer has the privilege of managing flow control and multiplexing protocols over the MAC layer to transmit and demultiplexing when receiving, as shown in [Figure](assets/ethernetDemultiplexingExample.png). 
- to learn more about LLC [check here](refPage/LLL-working.md)


- The IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) 802 standard defines the protocols for the LLC (802.2), wireless (802.11), and Ethernet/MAC (802.3) layers. The IEEE 802.3 standard, also known as Ethernet, defines the protocols for sending and receiving frames to encapsulate IP packets. This includes the format of the frames, the process of addressing and delivering the frames, and the methods used for error detection and correction. Additionally, the IEEE 802.2 standard defines the protocols for the LLC sublayer, which include flow control, multiplexing, and demultiplexing of data.

- Overall, the Link layer plays a crucial role in the TCP/IP stack by providing a reliable link between devices on a local network and ensuring that data is properly delivered and received. This is achieved through the collaboration of the MAC and LLC sublayers and the use of protocols defined by the IEEE 802 standard.


### TO learn about more about how ip and mac adddress is used and ho wpacker is routed  [check here](refPage/mac-ipUses.md)




### brief summery about .  ICMP, UDP, TCP, IGMP, SCTP, DCCP . with its usedcases and difference between all of them [check here](refPage/%20ICMP-UDP-TCP-IGMP-SCTP-DCCP.md)



## ethernet layers

- As with the other PDUs, Ethernet has a header and footers, as shown in [Figure](assets/ethernetHeaderAndFooter.png).

- **Let’s review these in detail**:

    - `Preamble (8 bytes)`
    Alternating string of ones and zeros indicate to the receiving host that a frame is incoming. <br>
    - `Destination MAC Address (6 bytes)`
    MAC destination address; the Ethernet frame recipient.<br>
    - `Source MAC Address (6 bytes)`
    MAC source address; the Ethernet frame source.<br>
    - `VLAN tag (4 bytes)`
    Optional 802.1Q tag to differentiate traffic on the network segments.<br>
    - `Ether-type (2 bytes)`
    Indicates which protocol is encapsulated in the payload of the frame.<br>
    - `Payload (variable length)`
    The encapsulated IP packet.<br>
    - `Frame Check Sequence (FCS) or Cycle Redundancy Check (CRC) (4 bytes)`
    The frame check sequence (FCS) is a four-octet cyclic redundancy check (CRC) that
    allows the detection of corrupted data within the entire frame as received on the receiver
    side. The CRC is part of the Ethernet frame footer.

- The data payload is the section of the frame that carries the actual data that is being transmitted. This can be any type of data, such as an IP packet, an ARP request, or other types of network data.

- The footer of an Ethernet frame contains the Frame Check Sequence (FCS), which is a 32-bit value used for error checking. The FCS is calculated by the sender using a cyclic redundancy check (CRC) algorithm, and is checked by the receiver to ensure that the frame has not been corrupted in transit. If the FCS check fails, the frame will be discarded.

- In summary, Ethernet frames are used to encapsulate data and transmit it over a network. The frames have a specific format that includes a header, a data payload, and a footer. The header contains important information such as the destination and source MAC addresses, the EtherType, and VLAN tag. The data payload carries the actual data that is being transmitted, and the footer contains the FCS for error checking.





<br><br>                     

### About mac address
                              
- MAC addresses have two parts: the organization unit identifier (OUI) and the NIC-specific parts. [diagram](assets/MAC-address.png)                           

- A MAC (Media Access Control) address is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface on a device. It is a 48-bit value typically represented as a 12-digit hexadecimal number.

    A MAC address is divided into two parts: the organizationally unique identifier (OUI) and the device identifier.

    The OUI is a 24-bit value that is assigned by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) to a specific organization. It is also known as the "vendor code" or "company_id" and it identifies the manufacturer of the device. The OUI is typically represented as the first three octets (6 digits) of the MAC address.

    The device identifier is a 24-bit value that is assigned by the manufacturer to a specific device. It is also known as the "extension identifier" or "device_id" and it identifies the specific device within a manufacturer's range of products. The device identifier is typically represented as the last three octets (6 digits) of the MAC address.

    For example, let's consider the following MAC address: "00:11:22:33:44:55".

        The OUI is "00:11:22" (the first three octets), it's assigned to the manufacturer.
        The device identifier is "33:44:55" (the last three octets), it's assigned to the specific device.

    It's worth noting that MAC addresses are unique and are assigned to a device at the time of its manufacture. They are used by the network to identify the source and destination of a packet, and to ensure that packets are delivered to the correct device.

    In summary, a MAC address is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface on a device. It is a 48-bit value typically represented as a 12-digit hexadecimal number. The MAC address is divided into two parts: the OUI, a 24-bit value assigned by the IEEE to a specific organization and the device identifier, a 24-bit value assigned by the manufacturer to a specific device.

- The frame indicates to the recipient of the Network layer packet type. [table](assets/etherTypeProtocol.png) details the
common protocols handled. In Kubernetes, we are mostly interested in IPv4 and ARP
packets. IPv6 has recently been introduced to Kubernetes in the 1.19 release.

    EtherType is a field in the Ethernet frame header that indicates the type of data that is being carried in the payload. It is a 16-bit field and can be used to identify the upper-layer protocol, such as IP or ARP.
    Here are some common EtherType protocols:
    IPv4 (0x0800): This EtherType value indicates that the payload contains an IPv4 packet. IPv4 is the fourth version of the Internet Protocol, which is used to route and deliver data over the internet.

    IPv6 (0x86DD): This EtherType value indicates that the payload contains an IPv6 packet. IPv6 is the sixth version of the Internet Protocol, which is used to route and deliver data over the internet. It has a larger address space than IPv4, and is designed to address the scarcity of IP addresses in IPv4.

    ARP (0x0806): This EtherType value indicates that the payload contains an Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) packet. ARP is used to map a network layer address (such as an IP address) to a link layer address (such as a MAC address).

    VLAN (0x8100): This EtherType value indicates that the payload contains a VLAN (Virtual LAN) packet. VLANs are used to create multiple logical networks on a single physical network


- When an IP packet reaches its destination network, the destination IP address must be resolved into the destination host's MAC address in order for the packet to be delivered.

    The Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) is used for this purpose on IPv4 networks. It is responsible for managing address translation from internet addresses (IP addresses) to link layer addresses (MAC addresses) on Ethernet networks.

    When a host needs to send an IP packet to a destination host on the same network, it first checks its ARP cache (also known as the ARP table) to see if it already has the destination host's MAC address. If the MAC address is in the cache, the host can use it to send the packet without needing to send an ARP request.

    If the MAC address is not in the cache, the host will send an ARP broadcast message to the entire network, asking "Who has IP address X.X.X.X?". The host with that IP address will respond with its MAC address, which will be added to the sender's ARP cache.

    All devices on the network maintain an ARP cache for this purpose, so that they don't have to send an ARP request for every frame they want to send out. By doing this the ARP protocol is avoiding the broadcast of ARP request for every frame and reducing the network traffic.

    Example 1-8. ARP table :-  showing the output of a local ARP table would be helpful to understand the entries in the ARP table, for example, the output can be like this :
```
    ○ → arp -a
    ? (192.168.0.1) at bc:a5:11:f1:5d:be on en0 ifscope [ethernet]
    ? (192.168.0.17) at 38:f9:d3:bc:8a:51 on en0 ifscope permanent [ethernet]
    ? (192.168.0.255) at ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff on en0 ifscope [ethernet]
    ? (224.0.0.251) at 1:0:5e:0:0:fb on en0 ifscope permanent [ethernet]
    ? (239.255.255.250) at 1:0:5e:7f:ff:fa on en0 ifscope permanent
    [ethernet]
```






#### **The process that occurs when a computer on a local network (such as a home or office network) attempts to access a website hosted by a server on the same network. [DIagram](assets/ARP-request.png)**


    1. The browser makes an HTTP request for the website.
    2. Through the Domain Name System (DNS), the computer determines the IP address of the server hosting the website. Let's say for this example, the server's IP address is 10.0.0.1.
    3. To send the HTTP request, the computer also needs to know the server's Media Access Control (MAC) address.
    4 .The computer checks its cached Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) table to see if it has a record of the server's MAC address associated with the IP address 10.0.0.1.
    5. If the MAC address is found in the cache, the computer sends an Ethernet frame (a data packet) with the destination address set to the server's MAC address, and the IP packet addressed to 10.0.0.1.
    6 .If the ARP table doesn't have a record of the server's MAC address, the computer sends a broadcast ARP request message with a destination MAC address of FF:FF:FF:FF:FF:FF. This message is accepted by all hosts on the local network.
    7. The server responds with an ARP response message containing its own MAC and IP address.
    8. The server may also add an entry for the computer's MAC address to its own ARP table for future use.
    9. The computer receives and caches the server's MAC and IP address in its ARP table, and can now send the HTTP packets to the server.

    This also brings up a crucial concept on the local networks, broadcast domains, which refers to the fact that all packets on the local network receive all ARP messages from hosts. In addition, all Ethernet frames are sent to all nodes on the network, and each host compares the destination MAC address to its own. If the frame is not destined for that host, it discards the frame. As more hosts are added to the network, the amount of broadcast traffic increases.





## ABout VLAN and VXLAN

VLAN (Virtual Local Area Network) and VXLAN (Virtual eXtensible Local Area Network) are both technologies used to create virtual networks within a physical network infrastructure.

A VLAN is a logical group of devices on a physical network that act as if they are on a separate physical network. VLANs are used to segment a physical network into multiple logical networks, each with its own broadcast domain. This allows for better network organization, security and traffic management. For example, a company might use VLANs to create separate virtual networks for different departments such as finance, human resources and engineering. This allows for better security as traffic between the VLANs is isolated and also makes it easier to manage and monitor the network.

VXLAN is a newer technology that extends the capabilities of VLANs by allowing for the creation of virtual networks that can span across multiple physical networks. VXLAN uses a virtual network identifier (VNI) to identify a virtual network and encapsulates the original Ethernet frame in an IP/UDP header before it is sent over the physical network. This allows for the creation of virtual networks that can span across multiple physical networks, making them ideal for use in data centers and other large-scale network environments.

One of the main use case of VXLAN is in cloud-native deployments, where containers and virtual machines can be deployed across multiple physical hosts. For example, a company might use VXLAN to create virtual networks that span across multiple physical data centers, allowing for the deployment of containers and virtual machines in a highly-available and scalable manner.

In short, VLAN is used to segment a physical network into multiple logical networks, VXLAN extends the capabilities of VLANs by allowing for the creation of virtual networks that can span across multiple physical networks which is useful in cloud-native deployments, where containers and virtual machines can be deployed across multiple physical hosts.



- [Figure](assets/VXLAN-packets.png) shows how a VXLAN is an extension of a VLAN that allows network engineers
to encapsulate layer 2 frames into layer 4 UDP packets. A VXLAN increases scalability up to
16 million logical networks and allows for layer 2 adjacency across IP networks. This
technology is used in Kubernetes networks to produce overlay networks,
    which means Increasing the scalability of a network by encapsulating layer 2 frames into layer 4 UDP packets is done through the use of VXLAN (Virtual eXtensible Local Area Network) technology.
    When a device on a VXLAN network wants to communicate with another device on the same network, it first encapsulates the original Ethernet frame in a VXLAN header. The VXLAN header includes a VXLAN Network Identifier (VNI) that is used to identify the virtual network. This VNI is a 24-bit value that allows for up to 16 million unique VXLAN networks.
    Once the Ethernet frame is encapsulated, the resulting VXLAN packet is then sent over the IP network to the destination device. The destination device then decapsulates the VXLAN packet to retrieve the original Ethernet frame and processes the data.
    This process of encapsulating layer 2 frames into layer 4 UDP packets allows for the creation of up to 16 million logical networks, and enables layer 2 adjacency across IP networks. This means that devices on different VXLAN networks can communicate with each other as if they were on the same physical network, even if they are connected to different physical networks.
    Additionally, this process allows for better scalability as it allows for more logical networks to be created, each with its own broadcast domain and network address space. This allows for better network organization, security, and traffic management.

The Link layer has multiple other protocols involved from a network perspective. Like the layers discussed previously, we have only touched the surface of the Link layer. We constrained this book to those details needed for a base understanding of the Link layer for the Kubernetes networking model.











# Revisiting Our Web Server



- Our journey through all the layers of TCP/IP is complete. Figure 1-24 outlines all the headers
and footers each layer of the TCP/IP model produces to send data across the internet.

- lets see our webServer here and below is the cURL request to that web server after running it

`curl localhost:9000 -vvv`

```
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9000...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9000 (#0)
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9000
> User-Agent: curl/7.81.0
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Date: Fri, 13 Jan 2023 12:53:18 GMT
< Content-Length: 20
< Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
< 
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact
hello from GO server⏎   
```

- We begin with the web server waiting for a connection in Example 1-10. cURL requests the
HTTP server at 0.0.0.0 on port 8080. cURL determines the IP address and port number
from the URL and proceeds to establish a TCP connection to the server. Once the connection
is set up, via a TCP handshake, cURL sends the HTTP request. When the web server starts
up, a socket of 8080 is created on the HTTP server, which matches TCP port 8080; the same
is done on the cURL client side with a random port number. Next, this information is sent to
the Network layer, where the source and destination IP addresses are attached to the packet’s
IP header. At the client’s Data Link layer, the source MAC address of the NIC is added to the
Ethernet frame. If the destination MAC address is unknown, an ARP request is made to find
it. Next, the NIC is used to transmit the Ethernet frames to the web server.
- When the web server receives the request, it creates packets of data that contain the HTTP
response. The packets are sent back to the cURL process by routing them through the internet
using the source IP address on the request packet. Once received by the cURL process, the
packet is sent from the device to the drivers. At the Data Link layer, the MAC address is
removed. At the Network Protocol layer, the IP address is verified and then removed from the
packet. For this reason, if an application requires access to the client IP, it needs to be stored
at the Application layer; the best example here is in HTTP requests and the X-Forwarded-Forheader. Now the socket is determined from the TCP data and removed. The packet is then
forwarded to the client application that creates that socket. The client reads it and processes
the response data. In this case, the socket ID was random, corresponding to the cURL process.
All packets are sent to cURL and pieced together into one HTTP response. If we were to use
the -O output option, it would have been saved to a file; otherwise, cURL outputs the
response to the terminal’s standard out.


