
# 2 . Linux Networking

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# WARNING

 a port is a communication endpoint that is used to identify a specific process or service running on a device. In the Internet Protocol (IP), each device is identified by its IP address, and each process or service is identified by a unique port number.

There are two types of ports: well-known ports and ephemeral ports. Well-known ports are those between 1 and 1023, and are reserved for use by system-level or privileged services. For example, port 80 is used for HTTP, port 22 is used for SSH, and port 53 is used for DNS. Because these ports are reserved for system-level or privileged services, binding to them requires root permission.

Programs should be given the least permissions necessary to function, which is a principle known as the principle of least privilege. This means that a typical web service should not be run as the root user. Because of this, many programs will listen on port 1024 or higher, which are known as ephemeral ports. For example, port 8080 is a common choice for HTTP services.

When possible, it is best to listen on a non-privileged port, and use infrastructure redirects to forward an externally visible privileged port to a program listening on a non-privileged port. This way, if an attacker exploits a possible vulnerability in your service, they will not have overly broad permissions available to them. Examples of infrastructure redirects include load balancer forwarding and Kubernetes services.

It is also a good practice to run the service with a non-root user, to further limit the potential damage an attacker can cause. Additionally, it is important to keep the service and its dependencies updated, to fix any known vulnerabilities that may exist.



































