

# Basics

- lets run the web server which listen to port 9000
- Suppose this program is running on a Linux server machine and an external client makes a
request to /. What happens on the server? To start off, our program needs to listen to an
address and port. Our program creates a socket for that address and port and binds to it. The
socket will receive requests addressed to both the specified address and port - 9000 with any
IP address in our case
- there are multiple  ways to inspect sockets [click fo rmore] for example `ls -lah /proc/<server proc>fd` will list all the sockets.
- The kernel maps a given packet to a specific connection and uses an internal state machine to
manage the connection state. Like sockets, connections can be inspected through various
tools
- Linux represents each connection with a file.
Accepting a connection entails a notification from the kernel to our program, which is then
able to stream content to and from the file.

- strace is powerful command which is used to see to trace system calls and signals made by a program.

- lets run strace on our go web server present in codefile :-
    - check if this file is executble or not , if now chenge the permission and build this file.
    - run `strace ../learnNetworking/codeFile/webServer/webserver` --> build file

    1. Open a file descriptor.<br>
    2. Create a TCP socket for IPv6 connections.<br>
    2. Disable IPV6_V6ONLY on the socket. Now, it can listen on IPv4 and IPv6.<br>
    3. Bind the IPv6 socket to listen on port 8080 (all addresses).<br>
    4. Wait for a request.

- Once the server has started, we see the output from strace pause on epoll_wait.
At this point, the server is listening on its socket and waiting for the kernel to notify it about
packets. When we make a request to our listening server, we see the “Hello” message:

### NOTE 
0.0.0.0 in IPv4 and [::] in IPv6 are wildcard addresses. They match all addresses of
their respective protocol and, as such, listen on all available IP addresses when used for a
socket binding.
This is useful to expose a service, without prior knowledge of what IP addresses the
machines running it will have. Most network-exposed services bind this way.


# The Network Interface

- Computers use a network interface to communicate with the outside world. Network
interfaces can be physical (e.g., an Ethernet network controller) or virtual. Virtual network
interfaces do not correspond to physical hardware; they are abstract interfaces provided by the
host or hypervisor.
- IP addresses are assigned to network interfaces. A typical interface may have one IPv4
address and one IPv6 address, but multiple addresses can be assigned to the same interface.
    - Multiple IP addresses can be assigned to the same network interface using a process called IP aliasing. This allows multiple IP addresses to be assigned to the same network interface card (NIC) and can be useful for configuring multiple virtual hosts on a single server, or for creating a virtual network interface with a different IP address. The process of configuring IP aliasing varies depending on the operating system being used. On Linux, it can be done using the "ifconfig" command and on Windows, it can be done through the network adapter properties.
- Linux itself has a concept of a network interface, which can be physical (such as an Ethernet
card and port) or virtual. If you run ifconfig, you will see a list of all network interfaces
and their configurations (including IP addresses)
**about loopback interface**
 The loopback interface is a special interface for same-host communication. 127.0.0.1 is
the standard IP address for the loopback interface. Packets sent to the loopback interface will
not leave the host, and processes listening on 127.0.0.1 will be accessible only to other
processes on the same host. Note that making a process listen on 127.0.0.1 is not a
security boundary. CVE-2020-8558 was a past Kubernetes vulnerability, in which kube-
proxy rules allowed some remote systems to reach 127.0.0.1. The loopback interface is
commonly abbreviated as lo


# The Bridge Interface


- A bridge interface, also known as a virtual bridge, is a software component that allows a system administrator to create multiple virtual network interfaces on a single host. These virtual interfaces act like a network switch, connecting multiple physical or virtual network interfaces together seamlessly. This allows the host to act as a bridge between different networks, allowing communication between them.

- In the context of containerized environments, such as Kubernetes, a bridge interface allows individual pods, which have their own network interfaces, to communicate with the broader network via the host's network interface. This allows pods to be isolated from each other, while still being able to communicate with the rest of the network.

- Bridge interfaces are typically implemented in the host's operating system kernel and can be configured through command-line tools or configuration files. They support various features such as VLAN tagging, Quality of Service, and network address translation.

- In summary, a bridge interface allows system administrators to create multiple virtual networks on a single host, connecting them together seamlessly and allowing communication between them. It is particularly useful in containerized environments, where it allows individual pods to communicate with the broader network while maintaining isolation

- The bridge interface (shown in Figure 2-1) allows system administrators to create multiple layer 2 networks on a single host. In other words, the bridge functions like a network switch between network interfaces on a host, seamlessly connecting them. Bridges allow pods, with their individual network interfaces, to interact with the broader network via the node’s network interface.

- demonstrate how to create a bridge device named br0 and attach a
virtual Ethernet (veth) device, veth, and a physical device, eth0, using ip

Add a new bridge interface named br0.<br>
`ip link add br0 type bridge`<br>
Attach eth0 to our bridge.<br>
`ip link set eth0 master br0`<br>
Attach veth to our bridge.<br>
`ip link set veth master br0`<br>




- Bridges can also be managed and created using the brctl command. Example 2-4 shows
some options available with brctl.
    `brctl options`

- The veth device is a local Ethernet tunnel. Veth devices are created in pairs, as shown in
Figure 2-1, where the pod sees an eth0 interface from the veth. Packets transmitted on one
device in the pair are immediately received on the other device. When either device is down,
the link state of the pair is down. Adding a bridge to Linux can be done with using the brctl
commands or ip. Use a veth configuration when namespaces need to communicate to the
main host namespace or between each other

- the steps to create two network namespaces (not to be confused
with Kubernetes namespaces), net1 and net2, and a pair of veth devices, with veth1
assigned to namespace net1 and veth2 assigned to namespace net2. These two
namespaces are connected with this veth pair. Assign a pair of IP addresses, and you can ping
and communicate between the two namespaces.
 **implimentation**<br>
`ip netns add net1`<br>
`ip netns add net2`<br>
`ip link add veth1 netns net1 type veth peer name veth2 netns net2`<br>

- Kubernetes uses this in concert with the CNI project to manage container network
namespaces, interfaces, and IP addresses.



# Packet handling in the kernel































