-------------------------------------------------------------------------
   1.<h1> TCP/IP model </h1>
       - TCP/IP creates a heterogeneous network with open protocols that are independent of the operating system and architectural differences. Whether the hosts are running Windows, Linux, or another OS, TCP/IP allows them to communicate;
       - TCP/IP does not care if you are running Apache or Nginx for your web server at the Application layer.
        

    => compare TCP/IP with OSI model



**OSI** 
    application --> presentation --> session --> transport --> network --> dataLink --> physical

**TCP/IP**    
    application -------------------------------> transport --> internet -->  physical------------


        
        -application layer
           -  the Application layer comprises the communications protocols used in
process-to-process communications across an IP network.
           - The Application layer
standardizes communication and depends upon the underlying Transport layer protocols
to establish the host-to-host data transfer


        - Transport layer
            - TCP and UDP are the primary protocols of the Transport layer that provide host-to-host communication services for applications
            - Transport protocols are responsible for connection-oriented communication, reliability, flow control, and multiplexing
            -Each port identifies the host process responsible for processing the information from the network communicastion
            - . Each port on the server identifies its traffic, and the sender
generates a random port locally to identify itself.
            - The governing body that manages port number assignments is the Internet Assigned Number Authority (IANA); there are 65,535 prots

    
        - Internet/ Network layer
          -  The Internet, or Network layer, is responsible for transmitting data between networks
          - For an outgoing packet, it selects the next-hop host and transmits it to that host by passing it to
              the appropriate link-layer. Once the packet is received by the destination, the Internet
              layer will pass the packet payload up to the appropriate Transport layer protocol.
          - IP provides the fragmentation or defragmentation of packets based on the maximum
            transmission unit (MTU); this is the maximum size of the IP packet
          - IP makes no guarantees about packets’ proper arrival. Since packet delivery across diverse networks is inherently unreliable and failure-prone, that burden is with the endpoints of a communication path, rather than on the network
          - The function of providing service reliability is in the Transport layer. A checksum ensures that the information in a received packet is accurate, but this layer does not validate data integrity. The IP address identifies packets on the network.

        
         - Link Layer
            - The Link layer in the TCP/IP model comprises networking protocols that operate only on
the local network that a host connects to
            - Packets are not routed to nonlocal networks; thatis the Internet layer’s role
            - Ethernet is the dominant protocol at this layer, and hosts are
identified by the link-layer address or commonly their Media Access Control addresses on
their network interface cards
            - Once determined by the host using Address Resolution
Protocol 9 (ARP), data sent off the local network is processed by the Internet layer.
            - This
layer also includes protocols for moving packets between two Internet layer hosts.





        - Physical layer
            The Physical layer defines the components of the hardware to use for the network. For
example, the Physical network layer stipulates the physical characteristics of the
communications media



























        
