
<h1>application layer working under the hood</h1>

##creating go web server and acessing it with curl to see the internal working of the network 

    check "codeFile/webserver"
    
    to connect server with curl rather the browser
        ``` curl localhost:9000 -vvv ```
    - after running curl output is 

```
*   Trying 127.0.0.1:9000...
* Connected to localhost (127.0.0.1) port 9000 (#0)
> GET / HTTP/1.1
> Host: localhost:9000
> User-Agent: curl/7.81.0
> Accept: */*
> 
* Mark bundle as not supporting multiuse
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Date: Wed, 21 Dec 2022 18:36:45 GMT
< Content-Length: 20
< Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8
< 
* Connection #0 to host localhost left intact

```

  
<h2> decomposing the curl working </h2>   

    - curl localhost:8080 -vvv: This is the curl command that opens a connection to the locally running web server, localhost on TCP port 8080. -vvv sets the verbosity
                                of the output so we can see everything happening with the request. Also, TCP_NODELAY instructs the TCP connection to send the data without delay, one of many options available to the client to set.

    - Connected to localhost (::1) port 8080: It worked! cURL connected to the web server on localhost and over port 8080.

    - Get / HTTP/1.1: HTTP has several methods for retrieving or updating information. In our request, we are performing an HTTP GET to retrieve our “Hello” response. The forward slash is the next part, a Uniform Resource Locator (URL), which indicates where
                        we are sending the client request to the server. The last section of this header is the version of HTTP the server is using, 1.1.

    - Host: localhost:8080: HTTP has several options for sending information about the request. In our request, the cURL process has set the HTTP Host header. The client and server can transmit information with an HTTP request or response. An HTTP header contains its name followed by a colon (:) and then its value.

    - User-Agent: cURL/7.64.1: The user agent is a string that indicates the computer program making the HTTP request on behalf of the end user; it is cURL in our context. This string often identifies the browser, its version number, and its host operating system.

    - Accept: */*: This header instructs the web server what content types the client understands. Table 1-3 shows examples of common content types that can be sent.

    - HTTP/1.1 200 OK: This is the server response to our request. The server responds with the HTTP version and the response status code. There are several possible responses from the server. A status code of 200 indicates the response was successful. 1XX means
                        informational, 2XX means successful, 3XX means redirects, 4XX responses indicate there are issues with the requests, and 5XX generally refers to issues from the server.

    - Date: Wed, 21 Dec 2022 18:36:45 GMT : The Date header field represents the date and time at which the message originated. The sender generates the
                                            value as the approximate date and time of message generation.

    - Content-Length: 5: The Content-Length header indicates the size of the message body, in bytes,sent to the recipient; in our case, the message is 5 bytes.

    - Content-Type: text/plain; charset=utf-8: The Content-Type entity header is used to indicate the resource’s media type. Our response is indicating that it is returning a plain-text file that is UTF-8 encoded.
    
    -  Closing connection 0: This prints out the response from our web server
        and closes out the HTTP connection.










<h2> Common content types for HTTP data </h2>

Type                                                            Description

application     -->                   Any kind of binary data that doesn’t fall explicitly into one of the other types.                                       Common examples include application/json, application/pdf, application/pkcs8, and                                                 application/zip.
                                     
audio   -->                           Audio or music data. Examples include audio/mpeg and audio/vorbis.

font    -->                           Font/typeface data. Common examples include font/woff, font/ttf, and font/otf.

image    -->                          Image or graphical data including both bitmap and vector such as animated GIF or                                         APNG. Common examples are image/jpg, image/png, and image/svg+xml.

model    -->                          Model data for a 3D object or scene. Examples include model/3mf and model/vrml.

text       -->                    Text-only data including human-readable content, source code, or text data. Examples                                     include text/plain, text/csv, and text/html.

video          -->                    Video data or files, such as video/mp4.






    - Today, a single web page makes an exorbitant number of requests with one load of a page, and in just a matter of
        seconds! This is a brief example for cluster administrators of how HTTP (and for that matter,
        the other seven layers’ applications) operate.
    - All this data is formatted and options are set at layer 7, but the real heavy lifting is done at the lower layers of the TCP/IP stack, which we will go over in the
        next sections.












<h1>Transport layer working under the hood</h1>





    - The Transport layer protocols are responsible for connection-oriented communication, reliability, flow control, and multiplexing; this is mostly true of TCP
    - Our Golang web server is a layer 7 application using HTTP; the Transport layer that HTTP relies on is TCP.

<b> about tcp taking transport layer in consideration</b>

    - TCP is a connection-oriented, reliable protocol, and it provides flow control and multiplexing.
    - TCP is considered connection-oriented because it manages the connection state through the life cycle of the connection
    - In TCP, the window size manages flow control, unlike UDP, which does not manage the congestion flow , In addition, UDP is unreliable, and data may arrive out of sequence
    - Each port identifies the host process responsible for processing the information from the network communication.
    - TCP is knownas a host-to-host layer protocol
    - To identify the process on the host responsible for the connection, TCP identifies the segments with a 16-bit port number. HTTP servers use the well-known port of 80 for nonsecure communication and 443 for secure communication using
        Transport Layer Security (TLS
    - Clients requesting a new connection create a source port local in the range of 0–65534.



    - To understand how TCP performs multiplexing, let’s review a simple HTML page retrieval:

        but first lets understand whats multiplexing is, so in networking terms multiplexing is ability or method by which multiple signal(request and responce) are combined into one and  can be transmitted over the network.
        for example one any site in web browser in inspect mode and then go to the network section of the inspect,  you can see multiple request and respose methods , that are loaded just by reloding the site( means it was multiplexed )

```
        1. In a web browser, type in a web page address.
        2. The browser opens a connection to transfer the page.
        3. The browser opens connections for each image on the page.
        4. The browser opens another connection for the external CSS.
        5. Each of these connections uses a different set of virtual ports.
        6. All the page’s assets download simultaneously.
        7. The browser reconstructs the page.

```


<h2>Let’s walk through how TCP manages multiplexing with the information provided in the TCP segment headers </h2>

[check tcp Segment link image](./assets/tcpSegmentHeader.png)



```
        Source port (16 bits)
            This identifies the sending port.

        Destination port (16 bits)
               This identifies the receiving port.

        Sequence number (32 bits)
                If the SYN flag is set, this is the initial sequence number. The sequence number of the first data byte and the acknowledged number in the corresponding ACK is this sequence number plus 1. It is also used to reassemble data if it arrives out of order.

        Acknowledgment number (32 bits)
            If the ACK flag is set, then this field’s value is the next sequence number of the ACK the sender is expecting. This acknowledges receipt of all preceding bytes (if any). Each end’s first ACK acknowledges the other end’s initial sequence number itself, but no data has been sent.

        Data offset (4 bits)
            This specifies the size of the TCP header in 32-bit words.Reserved (3 bits)
            This is for future use and should be set to zero.

        Flags (9 bits)
            There are nine 1-bit fields defined for the TCP header:

            1. NS–ECN-nonce: Concealment protection.
            2.CWR: Congestion Window Reduced; the sender reduced its sending rate.
            3. ECE: ECN Echo; the sender received an earlier congestion notification.
            4. URG: Urgent; the Urgent Pointer field is valid, but this is rarely used.
            5. ACK: Acknowledgment; the Acknowledgment Number field is valid and is alway on after a connection is established.
            6. PSH: Push; the receiver should pass this data to the application as soon as possible.
            7. RST: Reset the connection or connection abort, usually because of an error.
            8. SYN: Synchronize sequence numbers to initiate a connection.
            9. FIN: The sender of the segment is finished sending data to its peer.

        Window size (16 bits)
                This is the size of the receive window.

        Checksum (16 bits)
                The checksum field is used for error checking of the TCP header.

        Urgent pointer (16 bits)
                This is an offset from the sequence number indicating the last urgent data byte.  

        Options
                Variable 0–320 bits, in units of 32 bits.

        Padding
                The TCP header padding is used to ensure that the TCP header ends, and data begins on a 32-bit boundary.
                    
        Data
                This is the piece of application data being sent in this segment.

                
```




These fields help manage the flow of data between two systems. [check Data FLow link image](./assets/tcpIpDataFlow.png) shows how each
step of the TCP/IP stack sends data from one application on one host, through a network
communicating at layers 1 and 2, to get data to the destination host.







  









