
# tcpdump

1. tcpdump prints out a description of the contents of packets on a network interface that
matches the boolean expression.
2. tcpdump allows administrators and users to display all the packets processed on the system
and filter them out based on many TCP segment header details.
3. [Figure](tcpdumpPacketCapture.png) where tcpdump is collecting data in refrence to the full TCP/IP stack, between the network
interface card (NIC) driver and layer 2. 


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
**About Network interface**

- A network interface is the point of interconnection between a computer and a private or public network. A network interface is generally a network interface card (NIC), but does not have to have a physical form. Instead, the network interface can be implemented in software. For example, the loopback interface (127.0.0.1 for IPv4 and ::1 for IPv6) is not a physical device but a piece of software simulating a network interface. The loopback interface is commonly used in test environments.
- NetworkInterface is useful for a multi-homed system, which is a system with multiple NICs. Using ```NetworkInterface```, you can specify which NIC to use for a particular network activity.

-loobbackInterface (lo) 
        - It is the network interface with which computer network communicate with itself
        - The most commonly used IP address on the loopback network is 127.0. 0.1 for IPv4 and ::1 for IPv6.
        - A loopback interface is a logical, virtual interface on a device. A loopback interface is not a
            physical interface like Ethernet interface. Loopback interfaces are always up and running and
            always available, even if other interfaces are down on the host.


"""
    to check all the network interface in linux [check this out](./assets/allNetworkInterface.png )
        ``` ip link show ```
        ``` ip address show ```
"""


---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


4. The general format of a tcpdump output will contain the following fields: tos,TTL, id,
offset, flags, proto, length, and options

```
1. tos  :-
        The type of service field.
2. TTL  :-
        The time to live; it is not reported if it is zero.
3. id  :- 
        The IP identification field.
4. offset  :-
        The fragment offset field; it is printed whether this is part of a fragmented datagram or not.
5. flags  :- 
        The DF, Don’t Fragment, flag, which indicates that the packet cannot be fragmented for transmission. When unset, it indicates that the packet can be fragmented. The MF, More Fragments, flag indicates there are packets that contain more fragments and when unset, it indicates that no more fragments remain.
6. proto  :- 
        The protocol ID field.
7. length  :- 
        The total length field.
8. options :- 
        The IP options.
```


5. run the go server on codefile to check the packets capture by 
    run ``` sudo tcpdump -i lo0 tcp port 9000 -vvv ```



6. tcpdump is an excellent troubleshooting application for network engineers as well as cluster administrators. Being able to verify connectivity at many levels in the cluster and the network are valuable skills to hav


7. Our example was a simple HTTP application using TCP. All of this data was sent over the network in plain text. While this example was a simple Hello World, other requests like our bank logins need to have some security. The Transport layer does not offer any security protection for data transiting the network. TLS adds additional security on top of TCP.



































