
# Basic Git Concepts

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- A Git repository is simply a database containing all the information needed to retain and manage the revisions and history of a project
- unlike most other VCSs, the Git repository not only provides a complete
working copy of all the files in the repository, but also a copy of the repository itself
with which to work.
- Git maintains a set of configuration values within each repository. like `username` and `email address`
- Unlike file data and other repository metadata, configuration settings are not propagated from one repository to another during a clone, or duplicating, operation. Instead, manages and inspects configuration and setup information on a per-site, per-user,
and per-repository basis.
- Within a repository, Git maintains two primary data structures, the object store and
the index
- All of this repository data is stored at the root of your working directory in
a hidden subdirectory named `.git`.

- **In a nutshell**
   When a repository is cloned, Git creates an exact copy of the entire repository, including both the object store and the index.

    The object store, which is stored in the `.git` directory, is the permanent and immutable data structure in Git. It contains all of the objects (files, commits, etc.) that make up the repository's history. This data is stored in a compressed and de-duplicated format, which makes it efficient to copy during a clone operation.

    The index, on the other hand, is a transient data structure that is created and modified as needed. It is used to track the state of the working directory and is used to build the next commit. The index is private to a repository and is not propagated during a clone operation. This means that when a repository is cloned, the new repository will have its own independent index.

    The `.git` directory contains all the data that Git uses to keep track of a repository. So when you clone a repository, you're getting a copy of the `.git` directory, which includes both the object store and the index.

    In summary, the object store is designed to be efficiently copied during a clone operation as part of the mechanism that supports a fully distributed VCS, while the index is transitory information, is private to a repository and can be created or modified on demand as needed.
<br><br>


## git objects vs git index

In Git, an object is a file that contains data and metadata, such as the file's content, type, and a unique identifier called a SHA-1 hash. There are four types of objects in Git: blobs, trees, commits, and tags.

The Git index, also known as the staging area, is a file that stores information about the changes that will be included in the next commit. It acts as a buffer between the working directory and the repository, allowing you to stage changes before committing them to the repository. The index allows you to easily review and organize the changes you want to make before finalizing them in a commit.
<br><br>


## Git object Types

- At the heart of Git’s repository implementation is the object store. It contains your
original data files and all the log messages, author information, dates, and other infor-
mation required to rebuild any version or branch of the project.

- Git places only four types of objects in the object store: the blobs, trees, commits, and
tags. These four atomic objects form the foundation of Git’s higher level data structures.

1. Blobs <br>
    a blob is a type of object that represents a file's contents. It stores the contents of a file at a particular point in time, along with a unique SHA-1 hash that acts as its identifier. The contents of a file can be any type of data, including text, binary, or images. The blob object is also used to represent the contents of a file that is being added, modified, or deleted in a commit.
    Because a blob is simply a representation of the file's contents, it does not contain any metadata about the file, such as its name, permissions, or the date it was last modified. This information is stored separately in a tree object, which is used to organize the files and directories in a repository.
    When you make changes to a file in your working directory and then stage them using "git add", the changes are stored in the index as a new blob object. When you make a commit, the blob objects in the index are added to the repository, creating a new version of the file. You can refer to a specific version of a file by its SHA-1 hash, which can be used to look up the corresponding blob object in the repository.

2. Trees <br>
    A tree object in Git is used to represent the file and directory structure of a repository at a particular point in time. It is similar to a file system directory in that it contains a list of files and subdirectories along with some metadata about each item.

    A tree object contains a list of file entries, with each entry consisting of a file mode, file type, file name, and the SHA-1 hash of the corresponding blob or tree object. 
    The `file mode` is a numeric value that indicates the file's permissions. 
    The `file type` is either a regular file, a directory, or a symbolic link. The file name is the name of the file or directory. 
    And the `SHA-1 hash` is the unique identifier of the corresponding blob or tree object.

    A tree object can also reference other tree objects recursively, which allows it to build a complete hierarchy of files and directories. This means that a tree object can include other tree objects as subdirectories, allowing Git to represent the entire file structure of a repository.
    When you make changes to the file and directory structure of your working directory and then stage them using "git add", the changes are stored in the index as new tree and blob objects. When you make a commit, the tree and blob objects in the index are added to the repository, creating a new version of the file structure.

3. Commits <br>
    In Git, a commit is a record of changes made to a repository. Each commit contains metadata about the change, such as the author, the date and time it was made, and a log message describing the change. Additionally, each commit points to a specific tree object that captures the state of the repository at the time the commit was made. This allows Git to track the history of changes made to the repository.
    The initial commit, also known as the root commit, is the first commit made in a repository and has no parent. Most other commits have one parent, which represents the state of the repository at the time the commit was made. However, Git allows for commits to have multiple parents, which is typically used when merging branches. 

4. Tags <br>
    In Git, a tag is a way to assign a human-readable name to a specific object, most commonly a commit. A tag allows users to easily identify and refer to a specific point in the repository's history. For example, instead of referring to a commit using its unique SHA-1 hash (e.g. 9da581d910c9c4ac93557ca4859e767f5caf5169), a user can assign a tag with a more meaningful name like "Ver-1.0-Alpha" to refer to the same commit.

    Tags are useful for marking specific points in the repository's history, such as releases, milestones, or important changes. They are usually used in conjunction with commits. This way, when you want to refer to a specific version of your code, you can use the tag name rather than the commit hash.

    There are two types of tags in git :
    Lightweight Tag: which is a pointer to a specific commit
    Annotated Tag: which contains its own metadata, including the tagger name, email, and date, and a message.

    You can create tags using the "git tag" command, and also you can delete, list, and verify tags using git.
<br><br>

## Index


- the index captures a version of the project’s
overall structure at some moment in time. The project’s state could be represented by
a commit and a tree from any point in the project’s history, or it could be a future state
toward which you are actively developing.

- One of the key, distinguishing features of Git is that it enables you to alter the contents
of the index in methodical, well-defined steps. The index allows a separation between
incremental development steps and the committal of those changes.

- Here’s how it works. As the developer, you execute Git commands to `stage` changes in
the index. Changes usually add, delete, or edit some file or set of files. The index records
and retains those changes, keeping them safe until you are ready to commit them. You
can also remove or replace changes in the index. Thus, the index allows a gradual
transition, usually guided by you, from one complex repository state to another,
presumably better state.

- Also the index plays an important role in merges, allowing multiple
versions of the same file to be managed, inspected, and manipulated simultaneously
<br><br>

## Content-Addressable Names

The Git object store is a content-addressable storage system where each object in the store is assigned a unique name based on its contents. This unique name is generated by applying the SHA1 (Secure Hash Algorithm 1) to the contents of the object, resulting in an SHA1 hash value.

The SHA1 hash value is unique to the contents of the object, so it serves as a sufficient index or name for that object in the object database. Any change to the contents of the object, even a tiny one, causes the SHA1 hash value to change, resulting in a new version of the object being indexed separately.

SHA1 values are 160-bit values that are usually represented as a 40-digit hexadecimal number, such as 9da581d910c9c4ac93557ca4859e767f5caf5169. These values are unique and can be used to identify the object. Sometimes, for display purposes, the SHA1 values are abbreviated to a smaller, unique prefix. Git users refer to SHA1, hash code, and object ID interchangeably.

In summary, the Git object store is a content-addressable storage system that assigns unique names to objects based on their contents using the SHA1 algorithm. The SHA1 hash values are used as indices or names for the objects, and they change even with a tiny change in the content, thus ensuring that each version of an object is indexed separately.
<br><br>



### **Globally Unique Identifiers**

The SHA1 hash computation is a mathematical algorithm that generates a unique identifier, called a SHA1 hash, for a given set of data. An important characteristic of this algorithm is that it always generates the same hash for identical content, regardless of where that content is located. This means that the same file content in different directories or on different machines will always have the exact same SHA1 hash.

Because of this property, the SHA1 hash of a file can be used as a globally unique identifier. This means that the hash can be used to identify and distinguish a specific file from all other files, regardless of where the file is located.

A powerful implication of this is that files or blobs (binary large objects) of arbitrary size can be compared for equality across the internet by simply comparing their SHA1 identifiers. This means that if two files have the same SHA1 hash, they are guaranteed to have the exact same content, regardless of where they are located. This can be useful in a variety of scenarios, such as checking for duplicates or ensuring data integrity.

In summary, the SHA1 hash computation is a mathematical algorithm that generates a unique identifier for a given set of data, known as a SHA1 hash. The unique characteristic of this algorithm is that it always computes the same hash for identical content, regardless of where that content is located. Thus, the SHA1 hash of a file can be used as a globally unique identifier and files or blobs of arbitrary size can be compared for equality across the Internet by merely comparing their SHA1 identifiers.





## Git Tracks Content

Git is a content tracking system, not just a version control system (VCS). This distinction is important to understand because it guides much of the design of Git and is the reason why it can perform internal data manipulations with relative ease. The concept of content tracking is one of the most difficult for new Git users to grasp.

Git's content tracking is manifested in two critical ways that differ fundamentally from almost all other revision control systems.

- First, Git's object store is based on the hashed computation of the contents of its objects, not on the file or directory names from the user's original file layout. This means that when Git places a file into the object store, it does so based on the hash of the data and not on the name of the file. In fact, Git does not track file or directory names, which are associated with files in secondary ways. Instead, Git tracks content instead of files.

    If two separate files have exactly the same content, whether in the same or different directories, Git stores a single copy of that content as a blob within the object store. Git computes the hash code of each file according solely to its content, determines that the files have the same SHA1 values and thus the same content, and places the blob object in the object store indexed by that SHA1 value. Both files in the project, regardless of where they are located in the user's directory structure, use that same object for content. <br><br>

- Second, Git's internal database efficiently stores every version of every file, not their differences, as files go from one revision to the next. Because Git uses the hash of a file's complete content as the name for that file, it must operate on each complete copy of the file. It cannot base its work or its object store entries on only part of the file's content nor on the differences between two revisions of that file.

    The typical user view of a file, that it has revisions and appears to progress from one revision to another revision, is simply an artifact. Git computes this history as a set of changes between different blobs with varying hashes, rather than storing a file name and set of differences directly. This feature allows Git to perform certain tasks with ease.

In summary, Git is a content tracking system that tracks contents of the files and not the file names. It places a file into the object store based on the hash of the data and not on the name of the file. The object store efficiently stores every version of every file, not their differences. This allows Git to perform certain tasks with ease and it is the key reason why it can perform internal data manipulations with relative ease.


## Pathname versus Content

- As with many other VCSs, Git needs to maintain an explicit list of files that form the
content of the repository
- As with many other VCSs, Git needs to maintain an explicit list of files that form the
content of the repository. However, this need not require that Git’s manifest be based
on file names. Indeed, Git treats the name of a file as a piece of data that is distinct from
the contents of that file. In this way, it separates index from data in the traditional
database sense.
- It may help to look at [Table](assets/databaseComparison.png), which roughly compares Git to other
familiar systems.
- The names of files and directories come from the underlying filesystem, but Git does
not really care about the names. Git merely records each pathname and makes sure it
can accurately reproduce the files and directories from its content, which is indexed by
a hash value.
Git’s physical data layout isn’t modeled after the user’s file directory structure. Instead,
it has a completely different structure that can, nonetheless, reproduce the user’s orig-
inal layout. Git’s internal structure is a more efficient data structure for its own internal
operations and storage considerations.
When Git needs to create a working directory, it says to the filesystem: “Hey! I have
this big blob of data that is supposed to be placed at pathname path/to/directory/file.
Does that make sense to you?” The filesystem is responsible for saying “Ah, yes, I
recognize that string as a set of subdirectory names, and I know where to place your
blob of data! Thanks!”


## Pack Files

- An astute reader my have formed a lingering question about Git’s data model and its
storage of individual files: Isn’t it incredibly inefficient to store the complete content of
every version of every file directly? Even if it is compressed, isn’t it inefficient to have
the complete content of different versions of the same file? What if you only add, say,
one line to a file, doesn’t Git store the complete content of both versions?
Luckily, the answer is “No, not really!”
- Instead, Git uses a more efficient storage mechanism called a pack file. To create a
packed file, Git first locates files whose content is very similar and stores the complete
content for one of them. It then computes the differences, or deltas, between similar
files and stores just the differences. For example, if you were to just change or add one
line to a file, Git might store the complete, newer version and then take note of the one
line change as a delta and store that in the pack too.
Storing a complete version of a file and the deltas needed to construct other versions
of similar files is not a new trick. It is essentially the same mechanism that other VCSs
such as RCS have used for decades.
- Git does the file packing very cleverly, though. Since Git is driven by content it doesn’t
really care if the deltas it computes between two files actually pertain to two versions
of the same file or not. That is, Git can take any two files from anywhere within the
repository and compute deltas between them if it thinks they might be similar enough
to yield good data compression. Thus, Git has a fairly elaborate algorithm to locate and
match up potential delta candidates globally within a repository. Furthermore, Git is
able to construct a series of deltas from one version of a file to a second, to a third, etc.
Git also maintains the knowledge of the original blob SHA1 for each complete file
(either the complete content or as a reconstruction after deltas are applied) within the
packed representation. This provides the basis for an index mechanism to locate objects
within a pack.
- Packed files are stored in the object store alongside the other objects. They are also
used for efficient data transfer of repositories across a network.




## Object Store Pictures

- Let’s look at how Git’s objects fit and work together to form the complete system.
- The `blob object` is at the “bottom” of the data structure; **it references nothing and is
referenced only by tree objects**. In the figures that follow, each blob is **represented by
a rectangle**.
- `Tree objects` **point to blobs** and **possibly to other trees as well**. Any **given tree object might be pointed at by many different commit objects**. Each tree is **represented by a
triangle**
- A **circle represents` a commit`**. A commit **points to one particular tree that is introduced
into the repository by the commit**.
- Each `tag `is **represented by a parallelogram**. Each tag can** point to, at most, one commit**
- The `branch `is **not a fundamental Git object**, yet it **plays a crucial role in naming**
commits. Each branch is pictured as a rounded rectangle.
- **[Figure](assets/gitObjects.png)** captures how all the pieces fit together. This diagram shows the state of a repository after a single, initial commit added two files. Both files are in the top-level directory. Both the master branch and a tag named V1.0 point to the commit with ID 1492.
<br>

**LETS MAKE IT A BIT MORE COMPLICATED**
<br>

- Let’s leave the original two files as is,
adding a new subdirectory with one file in it. The resulting object store looks like
**[Figure](assets/gitObject-after-2ndCommit.png)**.
- As in the previous picture, the new commit has added one associated tree object to
represent the total state of directory and file structure. In this case, it is the tree object
with ID cafed00d.
Because the top-level directory is changed by the addition of the new subdirectory, the
content of the top-level tree object has changed as well, so Git introduces a new tree,
cafed00d.
- However, the blobs dead23 and feeb1e didn’t change from the first commit to the sec-
ond. Git realizes that the IDs haven’t changed and thus can be directly referenced and
shared by the new cafed00d tree.
- Pay attention to the direction of the arrows between commits. The parent commit or
commits come earlier in time. Therefore, in Git’s implementation, each commit points
back to its parent or parents. Many people get confused because the state of a repository
is conventionally portrayed in the opposite direction: as a dataflow from the parent
commit to child commits.



## Git Concepts at Work

let’s see how all these concepts and components fit
together in the repository itself. Let’s create a new repository and inspect the internal
files and object store in much greater detail.


### Inside the .git directory

$ `find .`

```
.
./.git
./.git/hooks
./.git/hooks/commit-msg.sample
./.git/hooks/applypatch-msg.sample
./.git/hooks/pre-applypatch.sample
./.git/hooks/post-commit.sample
./.git/hooks/pre-rebase.sample
./.git/hooks/post-receive.sample
./.git/hooks/prepare-commit-msg.sample
./.git/hooks/post-update.sample
./.git/hooks/pre-commit.sample
./.git/hooks/update.sample
./.git/refs
./.git/refs/heads
./.git/refs/tags
./.git/config
./.git/objects
./.git/objects/pack
./.git/objects/info
./.git/description
./.git/HEAD
./.git/branches
./.git/info
./.git/info/exclude

```

- In general, you don’t have to view or manipulate the files in .git. These “hidden” files
are considered part of Git’s plumbing or configuration. Git has a small set of plumbing
commands to manipulate these hidden files, but you will rarely use them.


- lets add a few file using `git add` and then run `find .git/objects`
   
    `echo "hello world" > hello.txt`   <br>
    `git add hello.txt`
 
    .git/objects <br>
    .git/objects/pack   <br>
    .git/objects/3b   <br>
    .git/objects/3b/18e512dba79e4c8300dd08aeb37f8e728b8dad   <br>
    .git/objects/info   


lets see what these stuff comes out of terminal is

## Objects, Hashes, and Blob

- When it creates an object for hello.txt, Git doesn’t care that the filename is hello.txt.
Git cares only about what’s inside the file: the sequence of 12 bytes that represent “hello
world” and the terminating newline (the same blob created earlier). Git performs a few
operations on this blob, calculates its SHA1 hash, and enters it into the object store as
a file named after the hexadecimal representation of the hash.

- The hash in this case is 3b18e512dba79e4c8300dd08aeb37f8e728b8dad. The 160 bits of an
SHA1 hash correspond to 20 bytes, which takes 40 bytes of hexadecimal to display, so
the content is stored as .git/objects/3b/18e512dba79e4c8300dd08aeb37f8e728b8dad.

-  Git inserts a '/' after the first two digits of the SHA1 hash of the object. This serves to create a fixed, 256-way partitioning of the namespace for all possible objects with an even distribution.

The reason for this is that some filesystems can slow down when there are too many files in the same directory. By using the first byte of the SHA1 hash as a directory, Git creates a fixed and even distribution of objects across the filesystem, which improves its efficiency.

The process of inserting the '/' after the first two digits of the SHA1 hash is called "two-digit directory split" . By creating a two-digit directory split, Git ensures that the number of objects in each directory is much smaller and more evenly distributed. This allows Git to avoid any performance issues that might occur if there were a large number of objects stored in a single directory.

In summary, Git uses the two-digit directory split technique to improve the efficiency of the filesystem by creating a fixed and even distribution of objects across the filesystem which in turn reduces the number of objects in each directory, avoiding performance issues that might occur if there were a large number of objects stored in a single directory.





## Files and Trees
















