
# SLI --> service level indicator

- It is the quantitative measures of some aspect, about how a service is been provided .
- few common SLIs are
    - Request latency
    - error rates
    - saturation 
    - throughput
    - availiability


- It is important to note that not every metric make a good SLIs
- BAsically the service level indicator is for user who uses this service. meaning if a server is experiencing hig cpu or mempry consumption.It doesn't effect the user in any way during this events.


# SLO --> service level object

- It is the target value or range for SLI.

- meaning lets say if we take availability as a SLI then the SLO will be 99.9% uptime.

- So basically SLO is directly related with `customer ecperience` 
- the main purpose of the SLO is for us to quantify the reliability of the product to the customer.


- It is also important to note that , the value we fix for SLO is to make the customer happy, with our service.
- few product need 30% SLO for certain SLI , and other need 90% . So we need to take the value of SLO which make user happy . 
- but why? because this SLO comes with cost, we cant make lets say 100% for availability if our coustomer need 90% , becaus to that extra 10% will cost us money , which will get wasted





# SLA --> service level aggrement

- SLA is the contract between vendor and user , in which certain SLO is gurentee.

- If this contract is broken then, there will be certain panelty , like financial.
















































