# What is shell scripting

- Shell scripting is the way of creating script for automation.
- In simple words, we can say when we work with same command on our terminal, its very inefficient to type same command again and again. To resolve this issue we use shell scripting.
- In shell scriptng we defind all the command we want to execute again and again inside a file and just execute that file .

# Why shell scripting

- To increase automation
- TO increase effieciency

# Few features that can provide by shell scripting

 - - we can set certain script to run when system is booted , like showing message to new session
 - we can set certain environmental variable during booting.
 - basically we can do anything we do with command line interface in linux

### Its important to note that every shell have different way of creating shell scripting file, there are many type of shells like bash , zsh etc.

# Introduction to bash shell

- the default shell that comes with linux is bash shell
- when we launch the shell, Its startup script to coustamize the behaviour of the shell.
- this script is located in `.bashrc` or `.bash_profile`


 - when a shell is used interactively , it display `$` when waiting a command from the user. This is called shell prompt.
    - `[username@host ~]$`

- If this shell is running as the root , the prompt is changes to `#`. The superuser (root user) shll prompt looks like 
    - [root@host ~]#


# How to identify bashscript ?

- File extension of `.sh` --> by naming convention , bash script have extension of `.sh` . But it can run perfectly fine without `sh` extension

- scripts starts with bash bang or also called as `shebang` . shebang is combination of `bash #` and `bang !` followed by path of bash shell. This is the first line of the bash shell script.
- shebang is simply an absolute path to the bash interpreter 
  - `#! path` or  `#! /bin/bash`


# Execution right 

 - skripts need the executing right from the user that executing them.
 - to chekc permissions `ls -l skriptFilePath` 
    - example `-rw-rw-r-- 1 anujaj anujaj 13 Jan 28 09:16 skript1.sh`
    check my linux README to check which file i have talk about permissionad how to make executable file. --> this file is non executable
    - made it executable `-rwxrwxr-x 1 anujaj anujaj 13 Jan 28 09:16 skript1.sh*` --> x denote the executable. check README for linux.

- created my first hello world skript --> check[skriptFile1](skriptFiles/skript1.sh)


- now lets run our skript --> there are two ways --> go to directoy where your skript fiel is preset
    1. `./skript1.sh`
    2. `bash skript1.sh`




# Syntax of bash skripting

1.  Defining veriable
    - `variableName = variableValue`

- to access the varable(use `$`)
    - $variableName

- ---> check the skript2.sh in skriptfile


2. arithematic expressions

    - `+` --> addition
    - `-` --> subtraction
    - `*` --> multiplication
    - `/` --> division
    - `**` --> exponentiation
    - `%` --> modulus

- numerical expression can also be calculated and stored in variable using the syntax
    - `var=$((expression))` 
    - we cant get accurate fraction calculation

    - we use `bc` (bash calculator) and `scale` to do fractional calculation .
- ---> check skript3.sh in skriptfile

3. how to read user input

- using `read` command
    - eg `read variable_name`
- To promp the user with custom messange , use `-p` flag
    - eg `read -p "Enter your age" variable_name`


- ---> check skript4.sh in skriptfile



4. numeric comparison logical operators
    - equality (`-eq`)
    - greater than equal to (`-ge`)
    - greater than (-gt)
    - less than equal to (-le)
    - less than (-lt)
    - not equal to (-ne)


- syntax
```
if [ conditions ] 
    then
        commands
fi 
```
    - if --> starting of if 
    - fi --> ending of if block

- example --> compare two number and find relation between them
    - check the script5.sh in skriptfile
    - we can use `elif`




# conditional statements (Decision making)

- it is the expression which evalueate boolean expression (true or false)

- to check condition we can use `if` , `else` , `elif`

- structure will be
    - if...then...fi
    - if...then...else...fi
    - if..elif..else..fi
    - if..then..else..if..then..fi..fi..  --> nested conditionals

- syntax
```
if [[ condition ]]
then
	statement
elif [[ condition ]]; then
	statement 
else
	do this by default
fi
```

- we can also use AND (-a)  ,   OR (-o)  to make meaningfull statement


























