# What is YAML and its features

- YAML arn't Markup Language (YAML) is a data serialization language 
- It is designed to be human friendly and work perfectly with other programming languages.
- It is usefull to manage data and include Unicode printable characters.
- It support one-direction processing
- It is basically used to create configuration file.

# YAML Basics

1. use of `---`
    - It is ised to indicate the start of new document within YAML file
    - Each document start with `---` and represent single unit if data.
    - This feature helps in storing multiple configuration of a project in single yaml data

2. use of `#`
    - It is used to write comment in yaml file

3. Plese Note: yaml doesn't support `tab` so dont use tab rather use `space` 

4. Scalars Value 
    - this represent single string or single number.
    - for example
        ``` name: Anuj
            address: 7 
        ```
    - In folded text format
        ```
            men: [a, b]
            men:
             - a
             - b
        ```

    - here name is string scaler value and address is numeric scaller value

5. Mapping
    - this represent `key-value` pairs, like hashmap or dictionary in other programming language
    - hyphen and space is used to map A to B  --> `A: B`   

```
name: ANuj
address:
    street: 1
    city: 2
    state: 3

```

    - here address is mapping which maps the `street`, `city`, `state` to thie respective values

    - to make it short we can use folded text format
    ```
        - {name: aj, kr: 34}
        - name: aj
        kr: 34
    ```
    - both of them are equal 

6. Sequences
    - this represent ordered list of values , similar to arrays in programming.

```
hobbies:
  - 1
  - 2
  - 3
```
- it is equvalent to hobbies = [1,2,3]

7. Indentation
    - It is used to defined scope of element we defined

8. Anchors and aliases
    - to is used to reuse elemets within yaml documents.
    - which makes us easier to manage complex data structures.

```
person: &person_id
  name: aj
  number: 2

friend:
  name: kr
  age: 3
  friends: *person_id
```
    - here this `&person_id` is an anchor that is assigned to the `person` mapping.
    - The `*person_id` alias then refrencedthe `person` mapping , so that the `friend` mapping containes the same data as `person`.

    - This is useful when you have a complex data structure that you want to reuse multiple times in yaml documents

