# Booting and shutting down
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Bootstraping

- Bootstrapping is the standard term for “starting up a computer.” The operating
system’s normal facilities are not available during the startup process, so the com-
puter must “pull itself up by its own bootstraps.” During bootstrapping, the kernel
is loaded into memory and begins to execute. A variety of initialization tasks are
performed, and the system is then made available to users
- Boot time is a period of special vulnerability. Errors in configuration, missing or
unreliable equipment, and damaged filesystems can all prevent a computer from
coming up. Boot configuration is often one of the first tasks an administrator
must perform on a new system, especially when adding new hardware. Unfortu-
nately, it is also one of the touchiest, and it requires some familiarity with many
other aspects of the system.
- Boot time is a period of special vulnerability. Errors in configuration, missing or
unreliable equipment, and damaged filesystems can all prevent a computer from
coming up. Boot configuration is often one of the first tasks an administrator
must perform on a new system, especially when adding new hardwar
- When a computer is turned on, it first executes boot code that is stored in ROM.
That code in turn attempts to figure out how to load and start the kernel. The
kernel probes the system’s hardware and then spawns the system’s init process,
which is always process number 1.
- Before the system is fully booted, filesystems must be checked and mounted, and
system daemons started. These procedures are managed by a series of shell scripts
(sometimes called “init scripts”) that are run in sequence by init. The exact layout
of the startup scripts and the manner in which they are executed vary among sys-
tems

## Recovery boot to a shell

- In normal operation, systems boot themselves independently and are then ac-
cessed remotely by administrators and users. However, administrators need a re-
covery tool they can use if a disk crashes or a configuration problem prevents the
system from completing the normal boot process. Instead of shooting for full sys-
tem operation, UNIX systems can boot just enough to run a shell on the system
console. This option is traditionally known as booting to single-user mode, recov-
ery mode, or maintenance mode, all terms that we use interchangeably in this
chapter. As its name implies, single-user mode does not allow network operation;
you need physical access to the system console to use it.

- On most systems, you request a boot to single-user mode by passing an argument
to the kernel at boot time. If the system is already up and running, you can bring
it down to single-user mode with the shutdown or `telinit` command.

## Steps in the boot process


- A typical bootstrapping process consists of six distinct phases:
    - Reading of the boot loader from the master boot record
    - Loading and initialization of the kernel
    - Device detection and configurationCreation of kernelprocesses
    - Administrator intervention (single-user mode only)
    - Execution of system startup scripts


- Administrators have little interactive control over most of these steps. Instead, ad-
mins change most bootstrap configurations by editing config files for the system
startup scripts or by changing the arguments the boot loader passes to the kernel.




## Kernel initialization

- The kernel is itself a program, and the first bootstrapping task is to get this pro-
gram into memory so that it can be executed. The pathname of the kernel is ven-
dor dependent, but it has traditionally been something like /unix or /vmunix. On
Linux systems, the kernel is usually some variation of /boot/vmlinuz.
- Most systems implement a two-stage loading process. During the first stage, the
system ROM loads a small boot program into memory from disk. This program,
called the boot loader, then arranges for the kernel to be loaded. This procedure
occurs outside the domain of UNIX and so is not standardized among systems.
- The kernel probes the system to learn how much RAM is available. Some of the
kernel’s internal data structures are statically sized, so the kernel sets aside some
memory for itself when it starts. This memory is reserved for the kernel and can-
not be used by user-level processes. The kernel prints a message on the console
that reports the total amount of physical memory and the amount available to
user processes.




## Hardware configuration

- One of the kernel’s first chores is to scrutinize the machine’s environment to see
what hardware is present. As it probes the various system buses and inventories
the hardware, the kernel prints out a line of cryptic information about each device
it finds. In many cases, the kernel loads device drivers as independent kernel
modules. For PC-based operating systems, vendors include kernels that work on
most machine configurations and require minimal (if any) customization.
- Hardware configuration should be a relatively transparent process for administra-
tors, especially under Linux. Kernels distributed by vendors are extremely modu-
lar and will automatically detect most hardware. Nonetheless, you may encounter
unrecognized hardware at some point
- Hardware configuration should be a relatively transparent process for administra-
tors, especially under Linux. Kernels distributed by vendors are extremely modu-
lar and will automatically detect most hardware. Nonetheless, you may encounter
unrecognized hardware at some point

## Creation of kernel processes

- Once basic initialization is complete, the kernel creates several “spontaneous”
processes in user space. They’re called spontaneous processes because they are not
created through the normal system fork mechanism The exact number of spontaneous processes varies, although init is always PID 1.Most UNIX systems have sched as process 0
- Under Linux, there is no visible PID 0. init is accompanied by several memory
and kernel handler processes, including those shown in Table 3.1. These processes
all have low-numbered PIDs and can be identified by the brackets around their
names in ps listings (e.g., [kacpid]). Sometimes the process names have a slash
and a digit at the end, such as [kblockd/0]. The number indicates the processor on
which the thread is running, which may be of interest on a multiprocessor system
- Among these processes, only init is really a full-fledged user process. The others
are actually portions of the kernel that have been dressed up to look like processes
for scheduling or architectural reasons.
- UNIX systems create similar kernel processes, but since these processes represent
aspects of the kernel implementation, none of the names or functions are neces-
sarily common among systems. Fortunately, administrators never need to interact
with these processes directly.
- Once these processes have been created, the kernel’s role in bootstrapping is com-
plete. However, none of the processes that handle basic operations (such as ac-
cepting logins) have been created, nor have most system daemons been started.
All of these tasks are taken care of (indirectly, in some cases) by init.





## Operator intervention (recovery mode only)


- If the system is to be brought up in recovery mode, a command-line flag passed in
by the kernel notifies init of this fact as it starts up. During a single-user boot on
sane systems, you are prompted to enter the root password. If you enter the right
password, the system spawns a root shell. You can type <Control-D> instead of a
password to bypass single-user mode and continue with a normal boot

- From the single-user shell, you can execute commands in much the same way as
when logged in on a fully booted system. However, sometimes only the root parti-
tion is mounted; you must mount other filesystems by hand to use programs that
don’t live in /bin, /sbin, or /etc

- If /etc is part of the root filesystem (the usual case), it will be
impossible to edit many important configuration files.1 To fix this problem, you’ll
have to begin your single-user session by remounting / in read/write mode. In
Linux, the command

- It first notes that on most systems, running the command `"mount /"` will make the mount command consult the `fstab` or `vfstab` file to determine how the filesystem should be mounted. This file contains information about how the different filesystems on the system are configured and should be mounted.
  
- Red Hat's single-user mode is more aggressive than normal. This means that by the time the user reaches the shell prompt, the system has usually already tried to mount all local filesystems. This can be helpful, but can also be problematic if one of the filesystems is "sick" or has issues. In such cases, the user may need to run the fsck command by hand in order to check and repair the filesystem. 
  
- Finally,once the single-user shell exits, the system will attempt to continue booting in the normal fashion. This means that after the user has finished performing any necessary maintenance or troubleshooting tasks and exits the single-user shell, the system will attempt to continue the boot process as if it had not been started in single-user mode.



























