# Linux OS and File systems
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- linux is collection of file systems means every thisng inside linux is a file . Be it your general directory , processses , networks . Jus teverything is just a collection of file. 
**wana see  this so calle**

    - go to root directory of your linux os `cd /`
    - type `tree -L 1`  --> this will give you all the directory or file system of linux in tree like ways where 1 is depth o f the tree
    - If you wana see something fun . type `tree` --> this will give every files inside your directory means level is every level. or you can choose what level you wana see

    - after that you will get <br>
    ├── bin -> usr/bin <br>
    ├── boot<br>
    ├── cdrom<br>
    ├── dev<br>
    ├── etc<br>
    ├── home<br>
    ├── lib -> usr/lib<br>
    ├── lib32 -> usr/lib32<br>
    ├── lib64 -> usr/lib64<br>
    ├── libx32 -> usr/libx32<br>
    ├── lost+found<br>
    ├── media<br>
    ├── mnt<br>
    ├── opt<br>
    ├── proc<br>
    ├── root<br>
    ├── run<br>
    ├── sbin -> usr/sbin<br>
    ├── snap<br>
    ├── srv<br>
    ├── swapfile<br>
    ├── sys<br>
    ├── tmp<br>
    ├── usr<br>
    └── var<br>





    - Now lets talk about these diretories comes here
        1. `boot`--> this contain all the system file which is required to boot up the system or to start the system.
        2. `dev` --> this contain device configuration file , like keyboard , mouse
        3. `etc` --> this contai all the system wide configurations
        4. `home`  --> every user home directory to store documents
        5. `media` --> device mounts like CD or thumb drives
        6. `mnt` --> it is temperory mount point for added filesystem
        7. `opt` --> this contain program that install binary and liberarry one directory
        8. `proc` --> this represent current state of the system
        9. `root` --> this is the home directory of the root user
        10. `run` --> this contain temperory runtime files
        11. `snap` --> it is a package manager , like in ubuntu apt and fedora yum
        12. `srv` --> it contain site specific data like location of the user, ips , dns
        13. `sys` --> virtual file system for viewing kernels
        14. `temp` -->  it contain temperory files
        15. `usr` --> contain user binaries and files
        16. `var` --> fo rvariable data like logs, which can change






## how to get OS info like current dextro, other system info such a ram and CPU

    - `ls` --> list all the content of the directory
    - `pwd` --> print path of present/ current working dircetory
    - `cd` --> change directory ( `cd /.` or `cd .` --> previous directory)
    - `clear` --> to clear the terminal screen
    - `man` --> this is manual pages , which is manual for the command . eg --> `man lsb_release` to come out of manual page press `q`
        - to search all the maual page with certain flag lets say,  then type `/flagName` 
    - `cat` --> to print file details


    - let's find abput differnt inforeation about file system or distribution
        1. `lsb_release -a`
        2. `cat /etc/os-release`
        3. `uname -a`
        4. `lscpu`  ---> detaild cpu info
        5. `lsmem` --> detailed ram info
            get offline memery  --> currently used
            get online memeory  --> currtly available
         


## how to get syslog and find where is it in linux system

    - A system log, also known as a syslog, contains a record of system events and messages that are generated by the operating system and various system services. The log entries typically include information such as the date and time of the event, the source of the event (e.g., the system service or process that generated the message), and a description of the event or message. The log entries can be used to track system activity, troubleshoot problems, and identify potential security issues.

    - Some of the common types of information that can be found in a system log include:

        1. System startup and shutdown messages
        2. System error messages and warnings
        3. System resource usage information (e.g., CPU usage, memory usage, disk usage)
        4. Information about system services (e.g., status updates, configuration changes)
        5. Security-related information (e.g., login attempts, authentication failures)
        6. Network-related information (e.g., IP address assignments, network connectivity issues)

    - The system log is usually stored in a file on the system's hard drive, and can be viewed and analyzed using a log viewer or log analyzer tool. The location of the log file and the format of the log entries can vary depending on the operating system and system services in use.
    

    -  to check where this file is which store all the information about system log
        - `find / -name 'syslog'` 
            - `find` --> to find a file
            - `/`  --> to run in whole present directory and directory inside of it
            -  `-name` --> name flag for finnding with fileName
            - `syslog` --> name of the file i.e syslog

        - then go to the output directory with vars as one of the paths. in my case it is `cd /var/log
        - now cat or open it on your faverate text editor or just type
            `cat syslog | less`

- `grep` --> to search through file
    - like `cat syslog | grep ubuntu`


## user info -> creating new user with a name 'anuj' and then make his default shell to be bash shell
- In Linux, a user is a person or a system account that has access to the Linux system. Each user is identified by a unique user ID (UID) and is associated with a username and a group. Users can have different levels of access to the system, depending on their group membership and the permissions set for the files and directories on the system. Users can log in to the system, run commands, and access files and resources. In addition, the superuser or "root" user has special privileges and can perform tasks that regular users cannot, such as modifying system settings and installing software.
  

- `useradd`  --> to add the user and see all the user
- `useradd -D`  --> default user added linux detail

- Understanding Shells and its types
    - shell is basically connect user command line instruction to computer. 
    - lets say when you type different types of command on your terminal then that command was taken by computer as instruction through shells

    - types of shells
        - default type of shells is bash ,
        - many more shells is also there i use fish shell. 
        - every shells have its advantages and is advantages like i tend to forgot the code or am lazy to write same ot again and again so in fish shell there is autocomplete features, which will suggest me previous code i written when i type few words

- Environmental variable
    - just like we learn programming language, variable is used to store any data. 
    - this environmental variable is global to this user meaning different user hav different set of environmental variable , and it is  not shared between users
    - when you type echo $ envVariable , it will return the value of variable which is stored in `env` file, in `key value` pair


- Creating new user
    `useradd -m anuj`
- without password of the user you cant change the user to anuj
    `passwd anuj`

- to switch user to root user
    - `su`
- to switch user to guist user
    - `su - userName`
- If you want to see all the user in your system 
    - `cat /etc/passwd`

## Group --> creating a new group named lets say docker and then add user anuj to he group docker

In Linux, a group is a collection of users that are given access to a specific set of resources or permissions. Groups allow for easy management of user access and permissions, as changes made to a group will apply to all members of that group. This can be useful in a multi-user environment, where different users may need different levels of access to the system. For example, a group called "admin" might have full access to all system files and resources, while a group called "guests" might only have read-only access.


- lets add this anuj user to sudo group --> mean they can run sudo command
    - `usermod -aG sudo anuj`

- in general to add user to a certain groups
    - `usermod -aG groupName userName`

- to see current user 
    - `whoami`

- to add a new group
    - `groupadd groupName`


- to see  how many groups user affilated with
    - `groups userName`

-  to run previous command with sudo previlaged
    -  `sudo !!`


















