
# commands and package managers



## Lets First talk about managers in Linux

- So have you thought why linux? I mean why whole technological landscape powered by mostely linux. let it be a server , your android etc.
- what linux provide is flexibility ! Okay so anuj what do you mean by flexibility. everything is flexible isn't if you know the source code, ou can change it the way you want right? well not really, you see evey software in other OS like windows has very coupled way of connecting 

- So flexibility in linux means that it can be customerised for any environment be it large scale servers for their need or be it embedded system like IoT(internet of things) devices. but what make it so much flexible ?
- there is different types of managers in linux you see . like
    1. file managers
    2. package managers
    3. service managers

    - lets talk about what file managers do --> they are maangers who manages file systems in linux . There are several different file system managers available for Linux, including ext4, xfs, and btrfs. These managers allow users to create, format, and mount file systems, as well as manage file system parameters and permissions.

    - package managers --> they are the managers who manages software install, modify or delete.  also managing different type sof dependencies. There are several different package managers available for Linux, including apt, yum, and dnf.

    - service managers --> This is a tool that is used to manage services, or background processes, on the system. The most commonly used service manager in Linux is systemd, which is used in many popular distributions. Systemd allows users to start, stop, and restart services, as well as configure service parameters and dependencies.


## Few commands

1. echo --> to print on terminal

- about path environmental variable
    - you all have heard of path environmetnal variable. well what it does. suppose you all types the different types of command like to open vs code you just have to type `code .` or you all use comands like `ls`, `pwd` st... but have you thought about you can run all those command in any diretory or correrct term is anywhere right ! well it can all possible due to this path variable , every command you have types is all stored in systems path or can say path varriable. and system always refrence the working of those variable from that path env variable directory.
    - type `echo $PATH` to see all the environmental variable directory
    - if you want to see all the file in environmental variable  directory, type `find $PATH` --> you can see the working of find in [here](codeFile/linuxCode.md) 


## package managers
    

- YOu all must have used the command `sudo apt update` or `sudo apt softwarePakageName` well what doe sit do , it update your all the local machine packags to its  latest version from the source or it check the source about the package you have types for.
- BUT ... BUT ... BUT where this OS look for the software , how does it update it .
- type `cat /etc/apt/sources.list` --> it will give you all the sources from which our local system contact to the servers to update our local packages or downloard a new ones.


# File , permission and redirect

## Vim editor

- Few commands use all the command in command mode only (type `Esc`)

- :q --> quit
- :wq --> write and quit
- :q!   --> quti without saving
- :wq!  --> write and quit by force
- `^` or `shift + 6`   --> begning of the line
- `$` or `shift + 4`    --> end of the line
- gg    -->     top of the line
- G --> bottom of the file (last line)
- i --> goes to insert mode from command mode
- A --> write at end of the line ( go to insert mode from command mode where curser goes ot last line)
- ESC   --> go to command mode from insert mode
- U     --> undo all the changes to entire line
- u     --> undo last line
- o --> open new line (goes to insert mode)
- dd    --> delete line
- D --> delete content of the line after curser
- C --> delete content of a line (next line) after the curser
- dw    --> delete word
- 4dw   --> delete 4 word
- cw    --> change word
- ~     --> chnage case of individual chgaracter
- :set nu   --> view line number
- :set paste    --> paste without auto indent
- :set nopaste  --> paste with auto indent






























