# File , permission and redirect 

## file permission

- to see file permission of files in curent directory 
    - `ls -l` --> for non- hidden files
    - `ls -l` --> for hidden files

- you will see something like this
```
➜  Linux git:(main) ✗ ls -l -a
total 68
drwxrwxr-x 4 anujaj anujaj  4096 Jan 25 18:21 ./
drwxrwxr-x 9 anujaj anujaj  4096 Jan 22 16:26 ../
-rw-rw-r-- 1 anujaj anujaj   408 Dec 30 13:35 11Dec2022.md
-rw-rw-r-- 1 anujaj anujaj 10719 Jan 19 00:24 18Jan2023.md
-rw-rw-r-- 1 anujaj anujaj  9409 Jan 19 23:22 19Jan2023.md
-rw-rw-r-- 1 anujaj anujaj     0 Jan 19 23:28 20Jan2023.md

```
- lets divide ti into 4 parts to understand the permission system :-

    - `   * (1st)    |     *** (2nd)   |     *** (3rd)   |    *** (4th)` <br>
       
- now lets see
  - 1st --> it defind information about file like if this is directory or file or link
    - if `* is d` --> directory 
    - if `* is -` --> file
    - if `* is l` --> symbolic link
  - 2nd --> it defined the permission of the owner , 3rd is for group permission and 4rd is for other permission 
    - if `* is r` --> read permission
    - if `* is -` --> no permission 
    - if `* is w` --> write permission 
    - if `* is x` --> executable

    - always the order will be  `read, write, executable`
      - eg -->  
        - rwx  -- > read permission ,write permission, and it is an executable file
        - rw-   --> read permission, write permission, but this is not an executable file
        - r-x    -->  it have read permission, no write permission, and this file is executable 
        - etc .. you get the gist of it now 




## to change file permission we use chmod
- chmod +x , +r , +w   --> means give executable , read, write permission respectively.
- chmod -x , -r , -w   -->  means remove the executable, read, write permission respectively

- chmod u+x , u+r, u+w  --> change in user permission
 
- chmod g+x , g+r, g+w  --> change in group permission

- chmod o+x , o+r, o+w  --> change in others permission

- chmod +x , +r , +w    --> change in user and group and others permission by giving permission for... executable, read, write.

- chmod -x , -r , -w    --> change in user and group and others permission by removing permission for... executable, read, write.


- now lets see the syntax for change in permission
  - `chmod changePermission fileName`
    - eg, `chmod u+x test.sh`
    - 











# Services


- service is a process or group of process( also knons as Daemon) running in the background and waiting for the request by client or user. and according to certain command it work to do it. for example the terminal is a process which perform certain task according to code feeeded.
- Linux have large variety of system services . like process managemant, logins, syslog, cron, and network services (such as remote login, e- mail) etc.

- Most of the current linux distribution uses `systemd` process manager. it is replacemet for init process, and to manage the systemd services, the primary tool is `systemctl command`


-  to see linux system services
    - `ps -aux`


- 29. To run multiple commands
    1. use `&&` --> `command1 && command2`
    2. use `;` --> `command1; command2`

- to interact and modify the system services
    - use `systemctl`   
    - eg `suso systemctl list-unit-files | grep nginx`

- to see the status of the service
    - `sudo systemctl status serviceName`

- to see the status of the service                                             
    - `sudo systemctl stop serviceName`                                       
    
- to start a service                                              
    - `sudo systemctl start serviceName`                                       

- to stop a service 
    - `sudo systemctl stop serviceName`

-  TO see the log of certain system services
    - `sudo journalctl -xe` --> all service logs <br>
    - `sudo journalctl -xe | grep nginx`  --> nginx service logs <br>


## Lets talk a bit about **cgroup**

    - cgroup is we say a control-group is a Linux kernel feature that allows for the management of system resources for a collection of processes. 
    - Cgroups can be used to limit and prioritize the CPU, memory, and I/O resources available to a group of processes, and to monitor the use of those resources. 
    - This allows for more fine-grained control over how resources are allocated on a system, and can be useful for things like isolating different types of workloads, or ensuring that certain important processes have sufficient resources to run.

